---
layout: post
title: Java Enum
categories: Java
tags: Basic
---
This article is about what Java Enums are and how to use them.
## Overview
The enum keyword was introduced in Java 5. A Java Enum is a special class that always extends the java.lang.Enum and used to define collections of constants.<br/>
Here is a Java Enum example:
```java
public enum TaskStateEnum {
    Unconfigured,
    Configured,
    Running,
    Passed,
    Skipped,
    Failed,
    Submitted;
}
```
A constant in a Java Enum can be regarded as an instance of this Java Enum. In the above example, TaskStateEnum.Unconfigured is an instance of TaskStateEnum.
## values(), valueOf() & toString()
We can get an array of all possible values of a Java Enum by calling its static method: *values()*.<br/>
Here is an example of printing all values of *TaskStateEnum*:
```java
for (TaskStateEnum taskState : TaskStateEnum.values()) {
    System.out.println(taskState);
}
```
The outputs are:
```
Unconfigured
Configured
Running
Passed
Skipped
Failed
Submitted
```
*valueOf()* is a static method in *Java.lang.Enum class*. It returns the enum constant of the specified enum type with the specified name.<br/>
Here is an example:
```java
TaskStateEnum taskState = TaskStateEnum.valueOf("Running");
System.out.println(taskState);
```
The outputs are:
```
Running
```
Notice that the argument for *valueOf()* must equal to one of the enum constant's name, otherwise you'll get an IllegalArgumentException.

*toString()* is also a static method from *java.lang.Enum*, it returns the name of this enum constant, as contained in the declaration.<br/>
Here is an example:
```java
String taskStateStr = TaskStateEnum.Passed.toString();
System.out.println(taskStateStr);
```
The outputs are:
```
Passed
```
## equals() Vs. “==” Operator
Since enum types ensure that only one instance of the constants exist in the JVM, we can safely use “==” operator to compare two variables as seen in the example above;<br/>
Moreover the “==” operator provides compile-time and run-time safety.<br/>
For run-time safety, in the following snippet where the “==” operator is used to compare statuses and a NullPointerException will not be thrown if either value is null. Conversely the an NullPointerException would be thrown if the equals method were used:
```java
if(task.getState().equals(TaskStateEnum.Running));
if(task.getState() == TaskStateEnum.Running);
```
As for compile time safety, here is another example where an enum of a different type is compared using the equals method is determined to be true – because the values of the enum and the getState method coincidentally are the same, but logically the comparison should be false. This issue is avoided by using the “==” operator.<br/>
The compiler will flag the comparison as an incompatibility error:
```java
if(task.getstate().equals(JobStateEnum.Running));
if(task.getstate() == JobStateEnum.Running);
```
## Fields, Methods and Constructors in Enums
We can add fields to a Java Enum, thus each constant enum value gets these fields.<br/>
The field values must be supplied to the constructor of the enum when defining the constants.<br/>
Here is an example:
```java
public enum TaskStateEnum {
    Unconfigured(0), //calls constructor with value 0
    Configured(1), //calls constructor with value 1
    Running(2), //calls constructor with value 2
    Passed(3), //calls constructor with value 3
    Skipped(4), //calls constructor with value 4
    Failed(5), //calls constructor with value 5
    Submitted(6); //calls constructor with value 6
 
    private final int stateCode;
 
    private TaskStateEnum(int stateCode){
        this.stateCode = stateCode;
    }
}
```
The enum constructor sets the int field. When the constant enum values are defined, an int value is passed to the enum constructor.<br/>
Notice that the enum constructor must be either private or package scope (default). Public or protected constructors can't be used for a Java enum.<br/>
We can add methods to a Java enum too:
```java
public enum TaskStateEnum {
    Unconfigured(0), //calls constructor with value 0
    Configured(1), //calls constructor with value 1
    Running(2), //calls constructor with value 2
    Passed(3){
        @Override
        public boolean isPassed(){
            return true;
        }
    }, //calls constructor with value 3
    Skipped(4), //calls constructor with value 4
    Failed(5), //calls constructor with value 5
    Submitted(6); //calls constructor with value 6
 
    private final int stateCode;
 
    private TaskStateEnum(int stateCode){
        this.stateCode = stateCode;
    }
 
 
    public int getStateCode(){
        return this.stateCode;
    }
 
    public boolean isPassed(){
        return false;
    }
}
```
In the example above, we add isPassed() method to TaskStateEnum to judge if the current state of task is Passed. The default returned value is false, but we override this method in Passed instance and return true. <br/>
Here is a test example that demonstrates how this works:
```java
for(TaskStateEnum taskState:TaskStateEnum.values()){
    if(!taskState.isPassed())
        System.out.println(taskState.getStateCode());
}
```
The outputs are:
```
0
1
2
4
5
6
```
## EnumSet and EnumMap
Java contains a special Java Set implementation called *EnumSet* which can hold enums more efficiently than the standard Java Set implementations.<br/>
Here is how you create an instance of an *EnumSet* :
```java
EnumSet<Level> enumSet = EnumSet.of(TaskStateEnum.Passed, TaskStateEnum.Failed);
```
Once created, you can use the EnumSet just like any other Set.<br/>
Java also contains a special Java Map implementation which can use Java enum instances as keys.<br/>
Here is a Java *EnumMap* example:
```java
EnumMap<Level, String> enumMap = new EnumMap<TaskStateEnum, String>(TaskStateEnum.class);
enumMap.put(TaskStateEnum.Passed, "Test passed.");
enumMap.put(TaskStateEnum.Failed, "Test Failed");
 
String taskState = enumMap.get(TaskStateEnum.Passed);
```
## Implement Singleton Patterns using Enums
There are many methods to implement a class using the Singleton pattern. But Java Enum provides a most easy way of implementing singletons.<br/>
In addition to that, since the enum class implements the Serializable interface under the hood, the class is guaranteed to be a singleton by the JVM, which unlike the conventional implementation where we have to ensure that no new instances are created during deserialization.<br/>
Here is an example about how to implement singleton pattern using Enum:
```java
public enum StateInstance {
    INSTANCE;
    public static StateInstance getInstance(){
        return INSTANCE;
    }
}
```
*INSTANCE* is an instance of *StateInstance* class and there can be only one instance in JVM.